Good afternoon.
Thank you for coming today.
So we're here to talk
about graphics and media,
graphics and media in Tiger.
And for the next hour,
Peter Graffagnino and I are going
to give you an update on some of the
technologies that we built into Tiger.
Of course,
there's a lot of stuff in Tiger,
and we've only got an hour to talk,
so we're just going to cover
some of the highlights.
I want to start by reviewing just some
of the simple view of the goals we
set for graphics and media in Tiger,
and really in Mac OS X overall.
At the very highest level,
our goal was to build the richest,
most powerful set of graphics
and media capabilities ever found
in a computer operating system.
We set out to do this
about five years ago now.
So what does that involve?
There are several key elements that we
knew we had to build into the system.
The first element was a
professional-grade audio subsystem.
So much of what we do
these days involves audio,
and that's everything
from professional-type
applications like Logic,
all the way down to the
consumer-oriented applications,
and we knew we needed to have
very robust technology for audio.
In addition,
2D graphics is clearly important.
Macintosh has a long legacy
of leadership in this area,
and we wanted to make sure that
that would continue in Mac OS X,
and clearly we've done a great job there,
and that's a very important part of
the story for graphics and media.
The third element is 3D graphics.
Now, of course,
3D graphics are absolutely
critical for games,
but increasingly,
this technology is becoming
vital for a lot of other areas,
including video.
And in Mac OS X,
this is a very important part of our
overall technology strategy for the UI.
There's a lot of things we can do,
leveraging the GPU and other aspects
of 3D stack that are going to allow us
to do amazing things in the operating
system to date and going forward.
The next major area is
our imaging technologies.
Now, these are the technologies that
allow us to connect to cameras
and printers and scanners.
And increasingly,
we're leveraging these technologies
to be able to perform some
incredible image processing.
And they're going to be very
important in the overall system.
Last but not least, of course, is video.
Apple has a really
strong position in video,
and our goal is to ensure that we hold
on to that and keep pushing that forward.
There's a lot taking place.
Now, these are sort of the right raw
ingredients for an operating system,
but this is not all that matters.
The next thing we have to be
concerned about is the speed
of the individual technologies.
Um...
Excuse me, I screwed up.
These technologies have
to be blindingly fast.
And there's a few things we
have to worry about there.
The first one is we know we need
to have the right architecture.
Speed is, in large part,
a function of architecture.
It also is important that we
have the right algorithms.
And then lastly, we know that we need to
have great implementations.
And this is one of the things
that you can count on us to
do for you going forward.
This is a very important part
of our service for all of you.
The second element has
to do with integration.
Of course,
we use these technologies independently.
But increasingly,
there's incredibly interesting
things that can be done by
combining the technologies together.
And we want to make sure that we're
providing an architecture that makes this
easy and also provides high performance
when you bring the technology together.
And we have several things that
we're going to show you today
to demonstrate some of the
progress we've made in this area.
The next important
consideration-- -- is ease of use.
The operating systems today
are incredibly complicated.
It's hard to realize this
when you think of them sitting
inside these little laptops,
but a modern operating system has
literally tens of thousands of APIs,
hundreds, perhaps thousands,
of distinct frameworks.
The challenge for all of us is how to
figure out how to plumb the depths of
these things and get the functionality
out and be able to wrangle it
and use it in our applications.
This is something that we
feel very strongly about.
Ease of use and simplicity
is not just for beginners,
but experts can derive tremendous
benefits with powerful tools
that help them manage the
complexity of their systems,
and we'll talk more about that later.
The last thing I want to
talk about is the future.
Of course, we know that things are always
changing in the world of technology,
and today we announced a very interesting
and very significant change in the core
technology on which all your system,
all your software,
is eventually going to be based.
One of the things that we wanted to do
in our operating system is to be able
to insulate you from as many of these
disruptive technologies as we can.
And there's a second part of it,
which is that if you can rely
on the APIs that we provide,
what we'll be able to do in the
future is we'll be able to provide
you tremendous benefits of performance
and functionality in the future
as the technology continues to evolve.
So this is sort of the high-level
goal that we set for the graphics
and media team several years ago,
and this is something we've been
executing on for a long time now.
So the next thing I want to do
is I want to start to go through
the technologies in Tiger.
We've made a lot of
progress over the last year.
We introduced most of these technologies
to you here last year at WWDC.
Last year we were just beginning,
and now we're done.
Things are out in the market,
and we're really pleased
with what's occurred,
and we want to tell you about some of the
things that we were able to accomplish.
The first topic I want
to go into is QuickTime.
Now, QuickTime is Apple's kind of
granddaddy API for multimedia,
digital media, and time-based content.
This has been around since 1991.
It's used by content creators
and developers to create,
manipulate,
and publish digital media in a
variety of different formats.
It's also -- it's built into the
foundation of the operating system,
but it's also used by virtually
all of Apple's professional
and consumer applications.
But this technology
is not just important.
This is also very important to Apple.
This is also very important to our
third-party developer community.
In fact, today,
Apple licenses QuickTime for
redistribution with
software tools and titles,
and every year we have more than
4,000 new titles that are licensed to
distribute QuickTime with their products.
So this has tremendous reach.
Now, because Apple provides
QuickTime for Windows,
we're able to go far
beyond the Macintosh,
and as you heard Steve mention today,
our estimates are that since
the beginning of QuickTime,
we've been able to distribute more
than a billion copies of QuickTime.
So you can see that it reached very,
very far.
In fact, it goes beyond the PC,
because Apple has licensed the
QuickTime file format for use
in a variety of non-PC devices,
and we've been able to incorporate
the QuickTime format into the base
of a number of industry standards.
We find that QuickTime technology,
is going way, way beyond the PC.
This is very exciting,
and I want you to know that the
state of affairs with QuickTime today
is it's very robust technology.
[Transcript missing]
had the headaches, so you don't have to.
This is probably the only multimedia
system that you can find out there in
the mainstream that has the ability
to work with this kind of media in the
way that you can do with QuickTime.
It's really quite remarkable.
You can learn a lot more about
264 and how it integrates into
QuickTime in session 208 on Wednesday.
So the next area where we
took a whole fresh look at
QuickTime is in the area of audio.
QuickTime and Quick-- the audio
support in QuickTime 7 is now
built on top of core audio.
And this means we inherit a
tremendous number of new capabilities
that we haven't had in the past.
And then combined with QuickTime's
traditional capabilities,
we're able to do all kinds of new things.
And very simply,
we've got rich support for a
wide variety of surround formats.
We can go up to 192 kilohertz
sample rates and beyond.
We're able to support all
the known sample formats,
including floating
point sampling formats.
And we provide better accuracy--
synchronization accuracy--
than we've ever had before.
You can learn more about the audio
capabilities in session 201 on Tuesday.
The next big area that we
wanted to tackle was sort of
themed video on a texture.
As you know,
the GPU is a real important emerging
development that's having dramatic
impact on the graphics community,
but it's also having dramatic impact
on the way that we think about video.
QuickTime, up until QuickTime 7,
had an assumption built into
its core about the nature of
video decompression and display.
And the basic assumption was that
the two ideas-- picture decode and
picture display-- were an atomic unit.
This was an intelligent decision,
the right decision when we first made it,
because it allowed us to ensure
optimal transfer of the media
through the subsystem at a time when
memory bandwidth was at a premium.
But for those of you who have
tried to take video and put it
on a texture and have the video
subsystem still work great,
you found this is a very difficult task.
This is difficult for us.
I'm sure it was very difficult for you.
And we set out in QuickTime 7 to crack
this nut and solve it once and for all.
How did we do that?
We introduced a new technology
into the system called Core Video.
This technology is
underneath QuickTime now,
and it allows us to split the
picture decode and the picture
display into two distinct phases.
Core Video provides a very high
performance service for timing
and buffering and ultimately
blitting of data to the display.
And then QuickTime is responsible for
managing the decode and the scheduling
of media to the point of the decode.
And so what happens here is by making
this split in the architecture,
we've now created a wonderful opening
for things like Core Image and
OpenGL to be brought to bear on
the video frames before they've
actually reached the screen.
And we're going to show you some
more about that in just a second.
You can learn about how to use
this in your own applications
in Session 207 on Wednesday.
So without any further ado,
let me come over to the demo machine
and show you a little bit about what
you can do with this technology.
So I have a very simple application here
that basically lets me bring up a clip.
It's just a movie.
And, uh, with this clip,
what I want to show you first of
all is that this is basically an
application that's causing video to play,
play, um,
play the movie to a texture and then the
texture is being displayed on the screen.
And what I can do with this
application is I can take,
um, well, let me explain one other thing.
So, um, for years people in the print
publishing world have utilized
color sync to do color managed,
uh, workflows for print publishing.
This is something that's very important
in professional workflows but has
never really been available in a,
uh, off the shelf sort of, uh,
easy to download sort
of a system in the past.
What we are enabling with core video
and QuickTime 7 is the ability to start
to apply color sync style profiles,
ICC profiles to video.
The color sync operations are
hardware accelerated so that
they can be utilized in parallel.
They don't have any performance impacts.
So, uh, I'm going to show you a little
bit of a sample of this.
So, I'm going to show you a little
So, I'm going to show you a
little bit of a sample
And it's really as simple
as dragging the profile on,
it's applied the video.
Here's another one which is
sort of a typical sort of a
popular kind of film effect,
sort of desaturates the video
and then increases the contrast.
So that's pretty cool,
and that's now possible with QuickTime 7.
Now, the next thing that we did was
just sort of gratuitous and cute,
but I want to show you this,
because it gives you a little bit
better sense of the kind of the power
that's underneath this whole system.
This is an application that
lets me basically turn my
video into a jigsaw puzzle.
So, I've got these little pieces,
and if I can find the corners,
I can maybe put the puzzle back together,
and I don't think I'm doing so well.
Well, the good news is I have a little
feature here that helps me make
this happen for you in real time.
Now...
This is pretty cool.
Let me tell you a little bit
more about how this one works.
So the next thing I'm going
to do is I'm going to move,
I can go to more pieces.
We're now up to about,
what are we up to here?
60 pieces.
With this, if you look closely,
what you can see is every piece
has a little shadow on it.
Of course,
the pieces all have these rounded edges,
and then there's the
video playing behind it.
So what's happening is
QuickTime is decoding to a texture,
and then using Core Graphics,
we've created a series of masks.
I'm using Quartz 2D.
We've created a series of masks,
and then the video is being
drawn through the mask,
and the shadows on the puzzle pieces
are being computed using Core Image.
So you've got all these
technologies working together,
and it's really quite remarkable.
Obviously,
this would be a very difficult thing
to do without these technologies.
And again, you can apply the auto-solve
to get your groovy,
funky animation.
And you know, you can really take this
thing to the extreme.
There's a few hundred pieces here.
We've got almost 500 puzzle pieces.
And again, the movie's playing just fine.
It's just working great.
So that's an incredibly powerful
new development in QuickTime 7.
Thank you.
So, you know,
one of the things that we learned
talking with you over the last couple of
years is that more and more of you are
using Cocoa to write your applications.
Many of you have really learned about
the dramatic benefits that Cocoa can
bring to your application development.
Well,
we wanted to make sure that QuickTime 7
was going to be a great client for
you if you're writing in Cocoa.
And so we told you about this last year,
and we're done with it now.
We've built a wonderful toolkit
that gives you very simple,
powerful access to QuickTime through
a set of Cocoa APIs.
It speaks the language that
Cocoa programmers speak.
There are no sort of foreign data
types and strange API conventions
that you have to learn now.
And it's very powerful.
In fact,
we wanted to make sure it was going
to be powerful enough to support
an industrial-grade application.
So we said we should be
using this ourselves.
So one of the other things we did in
QuickTime 7 was we went back and we said,
let's rewrite QuickTime Player,
and let's write it on top of QtKit.
And with QtKit,
we'll automatically inherit a whole
bunch of nice UI characteristics that
come with every Cocoa application.
And because we knew we had to be able
to support high performance playback,
I can promise you that the
QtKit framework is able to
give you full access to the
high performance application.
And that's what we're doing.
We're going to be using the high
performance parts of the audio
and video playback systems.
There's no compromise here
when it comes to performance.
So in addition,
we've been able to implement a whole
bunch of new features because we've
got an easy-to-use programming API.
We added some simple movie recording.
We added movie sharing functionalities.
There's a whole new set of AV controls.
A very important feature for many of
you is now when you're doing exports,
you can get multiple exports
running at the same time.
And you can still use the same API.
And that's what we're doing.
And we're going to be using
the same application for all of
the applications in the system.
And it works great simultaneously.
And it's actually quite
thread process friendly.
So it'll back off when you're doing
other things that are important to you.
Very, very cool feature.
And then last of all,
there's a new groovy full screen
control and display capability
that we're pretty excited about.
Now this is a great testament to QtKit,
but I don't want you
to take my word for it.
I'd like to bring a good friend here.
He's a great friend.
And we're going to get a good friend
of ours up to the stage to tell you a
little bit about what he's been doing.
This is Michael Johnson from Pixar.
[Transcript missing]
I was here about three years ago and
gave a lunchtime talk where I showed
you guys some sort of behind-the-scenes
stuff about how we make movies at Pixar.
And at the end of it there,
I showed a little
something I'd put together,
and it was a little program
that I wrote for Pete Docter,
and it's what we refer to as
being developed on a dare.
Pete actually asked for a program
that he could just kind of tap out
the timing of storyboards before
he would go into Final Cut Pro,
which is a much more complicated
program than he wanted for
that part of his process.
So I went off and I wrote a
little something with him.
We kind of iterated on
it for about two weeks,
and every day we sort of put
some new features in there.
And he really liked it,
and we ended up actually using
it for a whole bunch of things.
We ended up throwing another engineer,
Josh Annen, on with me,
and we spent about six months
doing a full-blown real
production app inside of Pixar.
And we have lots of happy users for this,
and most of them are on
movies I can't talk about.
And there's one that I can talk about,
which it was actually
used by Mark Andrews,
unbeknownst to us, the engineers.
Mark Andrews was trying to work
on the final battle sequence.
He's the head of story
on The Incredibles,
and he was having some
troubles pinning this stuff up.
And he heard about this app that we had.
He scanned his pictures in,
he timed it out,
he pitched it to Brad Bird,
and it went really well for him.
And so I asked Mark to come today,
but unfortunately he was busy,
so I have kind of the next best thing.
So Violet comes running
in with the remote.
"Mom, Mom, I got the remote!"
She turns visible again.
Here comes the robot.
"A remote, a remote for what?" "Violet,
I don't know!" She starts
pressing buttons.
Click, click, click, click.
"To control the robot?" Click, click,
"Why don't you come on thing?" Comes,
steps over camera.
Presses the button.
Click.
Rocket Boosters, the robot,
control the robot, takes off flying,
crashes into a building.
Bob's still stuck in the claw.
Maybe that wasn't the right one.
Here it comes.
Gets up, starts charging him.
Bob's still stuck.
Dash it all.
Here it comes.
Give me that thing.
You don't know how to use it.
Click.
Presses a button.
In the background.
Fwing.
Bob gets tossed up in the air.
Oh, my God.
He's free.
That wasn't right.
Bob grabs it.
Give me that.
Bob gets up off the ground
and sees the robot's coming.
Boom, boom.
Closer to his family.
Nothing can stop that thing.
The only thing that
can stop it is itself.
So like I said,
that's a little Cocoa app.
We wrote it three years ago,
and it was very successful.
It was kind of too successful.
And my group, we're really busy.
We do a lot of support for sort of the
story and editorial part of the pipeline.
We have other things to do.
We can't sort of just keep
tweaking these things.
But the requests kind of kept piling up,
and they wanted things like they
wanted to do longer pitches,
they wanted frame-accurate pitches,
they wanted sound attached to the boards,
they wanted faster load times.
And then what's interesting is
something we hadn't thought about,
which is as the movie gets made,
we go out of the storyboard phase,
and we go into the previs phase,
we go into a little modeling,
then we have some animation and lighting.
And they wanted this ability to
actually read back these big,
you know, 25 minutes worth of stuff back
from editorial and play those in
sequence with the rest of the boards.
And, you know,
this is sort of an obvious answer here,
right, which is use QuickTime, right?
But, you know, I don't know.
QuickTime is really... It's really hard,
and we're really busy.
We can't make that kind of investment.
And, you know, and frankly,
we're Cocoa programmers.
We're a little spoiled.
You know, we're simple people.
So about, oh, I don't know,
eight months ago, a year ago,
we started talking very
concretely with Apple,
actually, I guess longer ago than that,
maybe a year and a half ago,
about what we would like to see in a kit.
And Apple was very, very responsive,
and they came up with the QT kit,
which is a really great 1.0.
It's a framework that I think
is going to continue to evolve,
but right now,
the thing that's shipping there is really
great for doing sort of movies of movies.
And it did what we wanted,
which is let us get to the
power of QuickTime and remain
true to our inner selves.
Cocoa programmers.
And again, it's been about,
because the QT kit, that's one thing.
We built a couple apps with this stuff,
but the one that I'm talking
about here today is this
thing called Pitch Doctor 2.
And we've been working on
it now for about five years.
Five months.
And another programmer and I, Josh Minor,
and we're expecting lots of happy users.
We're not there yet.
We've got about another month
before this thing ships.
So I thought I would give you
just a real quick demo here.
So again, here's Pitch Doctor 2.
We just subclassed a bunch
of stuff and made it darker
because we like dark stuff.
So here we are,
and here's Pitch Doctor 2,
very similar to sort of
what you were seeing before,
except this time we've actually got
some previous stuff cut in there now.
And it's going in there,
it's going back and
forth between the boards,
and...
There's that sort of stuff,
and that's sort of in the middle,
when you're in the middle
of the process there.
But I brought along, actually,
so if you look down at the bottom here,
you can see this is about
four minutes of footage.
But where it starts to get really
interesting for us is when we actually
do stuff where we've got a real
big chunk of the movie on there.
So this is actually 6AB,
which is the last 22 minutes.
It's a double reel of the movie.
And so one of the other fun
things that we can do is,
in addition to doing video,
we actually have a child
window that we put up in there.
And so we're actually doing a
sketching stuff on top of there,
and those are based on those boards.
And so we're getting all the advantages,
all the sort of advantages of being
a Cocoa programmer and child window
stuff and all that kind of thing.
And all the power of
QuickTime and the fact that we
can sort of move around here.
I'm coming in here, going there.
And this is the kind of stuff that,
for us, is just -- it makes all the
difference in the world that
we can sort of come in here,
we go full screen on this stuff,
we're playing it.
We can work very, very tightly with huge
chunks of the movie.
And again,
this is -- Pitch Doctor was about 28,000,
30,000 lines of code.
Pitch Doctor 2,
we're actually using this framework
we wrote called the Film Online Kit.
It's about 60,000 lines of code.
And Pitch Doctor 2, the app,
is 13,000 lines of code.
So this stuff is real.
And it's really, really cool.
So I hope you guys use it.
And I'm giving another -- we
can switch back over here.
We have another talk on Friday,
kind of sort of the -- you know,
similar to the one
I gave three years ago,
sort of nominally called
Cartoons and Code.
And hope to see you there.
It's at lunch.
I don't know what room it is.
But you can look at the pieces.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Michael.
OK, so that's a quick view of QuickTime 7
and some of the things that
we've been investigating there.
And thanks again, Michael.
That was great.
So next,
I'd like to bring up Peter Graffagnino
and have him tell you a lot more
about some of the other core
technologies built into Tiger in
the area of graphics and media.
Thanks, Tim.
There you go.
Hi, everybody.
So I'm going to bring you through some
of the technologies we have for you
in Mac OS X for graphics and media.
And kind of to restate our goal,
I think you've heard a few of the
talks this afternoon about how
what we really want to do is make
it possible for you to create
applications that kind of surprise,
delight, and inspire your users.
You know,
the very Apple qualities we all like.
Another way to think about it is
shortening the distance between
your idea and kind of the code
that you create to implement that.
Little corny, I know.
So here's all the great core technology
we have that Tim talked about.
And the great thing to realize is our
plan to give you all the tools you
need is to build in professional-grade
technology into the OS.
Whether you're doing audio, 2D,
3D imaging, or video,
it's all right there.
And there's professional applications
built on top of all of these
stacks that you can go out and buy.
Or you don't have to learn
about the low-level details.
If you're just a Cocoa programmer,
all of these technologies are
enabled when you use NS Image,
or use the sound API or 2D graphics.
So I'm going to take you on a tour
through around these technologies and
kind of tell you some of the basic
facts about them in case you're new,
and also kind of what's new in Tiger.
So first up is Core Audio.
When we designed Mac OS X,
we kind of went back to the
drawing board on platform audio to
really bring it into the-- enable
a whole new set of applications.
And Core Audio is a
professional-grade audio platform.
It's floating point, multi-channel,
handles really high sampling frequencies,
and it's incredibly low latency.
We're able to accomplish this
by using some of the thread
scheduling primitives in the kernel
to get incredibly low latency,
which is real important
for high-performance audio.
New in Tiger is something we're
calling aggregate devices,
which is a way to take one
physical device-- say it's an
eight-channel device-- and make it
look to software-- two of those,
say-- and make it look
like one 16-channel device.
So you can aggregate physical
devices into one logical device.
That's really useful.
Also is a new thing called
the Core Audio File Format,
which is a new-- a
professional-grade audio format,
which goes beyond the 32-bit
limit for addressing full 64 bits,
multi-channel.
And when you start dealing with surround
sound soundtracks of really big,
long feature films, for example,
you can run out of 32
bits pretty quickly.
So that's a really great
format that's in there,
and it's built in the QuickTime,
and has lots of metadata support,
so it works well with Spotlight as well.
The other real important thing
about audio architecture is
having a good plug-in story,
and we've got that with Audio Units,
which is a platform-wide standard
format for doing audio plug-ins.
So you can do either DSP-type
plug-ins for just processing audio,
or instrument plug-ins like
you might see in GarageBand,
for example.
And it's supported by all the
premier audio applications,
so we've been able to kind of standardize
audio plug-ins across the platform,
which is really great for people
who develop audio plug-ins,
and great for hosting
applications as well.
There's hundreds of effects available,
and there's a licensing program,
which if you go to that URL,
and whether you write the individual
audio plug-ins themselves,
or you create a hosting application,
you can license the logo and use
it on your packaging if you want.
Another interesting application to
go along with the audio units is
something new in Tiger called AU Lab.
And AU Lab is a visual developer
tool for exploring core audio,
and it's sort of the best practices
test harness for your audio units.
Audio units actually can have
either a custom UI that's custom
drawn or a generic UI just on
their parameter description.
And in AU Lab,
you can either look at it both ways,
make sure it's working,
you can do live mixing and playback.
It's kind of a performance tool as well.
So you can look at audio units
in their full spectrum of uses,
both real time and just
within the application.
The other technology that we are
shipping in Tiger is called OpenAL.
OpenAL is a powerful
API for 3D immersive audio,
typically in games.
It's cross-platform, Mac OS X,
Linux Windows, and consoles as well.
And we engaged with this project before
Tiger and contributed to the open source,
but now it's actually built into Tiger,
so you can just use OpenAL directly.
It supports multiple
speakers for surround sound,
and it's of course all
built on core audio,
and there are a number of game titles
that are already shipping using OpenAL.
A pointer to a couple
of the audio sessions.
We've got audio sessions
tomorrow for you to check out.
Next technology is 2D graphics.
Quartz 2D and PDF form the foundation
of Mac OS X's 2D graphics API.
It's a professional 2D drawing model.
Obviously,
PDF and PostScript have been used in
the graphic arts industry forever.
And it's the basic of the whole
printing workflow on Mac OS X.
It's integrated with ColorSync
for color management,
and in Tiger,
it's integrated with Core Image for
image processing as well.
There's some good tools to
use with the Quartz 2D API.
There's a Quartz debug,
which really lets you get in
there and see how frequently
your windows are updating,
what parts of your
windows you're drawing.
It's a great tool if
you don't know about it.
You can usually shave a lot of
processing out of your app and
optimize your redraw speeds.
ColorSync Utility is the
utility we have in there.
It can do some advanced color
processing on PDF files.
Also has a profile visualizer.
You could take those profiles
Tim was playing with,
bring them up, and actually look at how
the deforming color space.
Great tool.
And also Automator,
which you've seen demoed before.
But it also has a-- we've provided
a few PDF actions for Automator,
so you can do batch
processing to PDF files.
And that's another opportunity for
applications who can process PDF.
If they can also do Automator actions,
you can build up a pretty rich
workflow of doing things to
PDF files through Automator.
[Transcript missing]
In fact, you can enjoy the benefits of
Metro even if you're still running 10.0,
because PDF has always been in OS X.
But actually,
there's a more interesting kind of
point here that I'd like to make,
which is kind of this point
about if a problem's been really
well solved in the industry,
obviously,
many years of graphic arts-- great slide,
isn't it?
You know, there's little value in really
reinventing something like that.
And there's a limited
amount of creative energy,
you know,
that anyone has or any team has,
and there's just better things to do.
And so the analogy here would be,
you know, if you're writing applications
on top of Mac OS X and all the
technology and all the work we put
in to all these core technologies,
you know,
don't go reinvent and write your
own 2D graphics library and your own
image processing and all that stuff.
Just, you know, leverage the platform,
you know, then spend your brain cells
on doing things that are
unique to your application.
So that's my little sidebar for that.
I'm glad you agree.
So next is 3D graphics, OpenGL.
OpenGL is the industry standard
API for 3D graphics and visualization.
It's been around forever and
really was the premier interactive
3D graphics in the industry.
And on OS X,
it's not just sort of an API that's
on the side that burls a hole
through the windowing system.
It's built in at a fundamental level.
In fact, our whole windowing system,
Quartz Extreme,
is built on top of OpenGL.
And OpenGL is running all the time,
and it has been for a
couple of releases now.
And in Tiger,
we're taking that even further
with things like Core Image.
We're putting image
processing on top of the GPU.
And with QuickTime and Core Video,
where we're putting video
display on top of OpenGL.
And some OpenGL improvements
themselves in Tiger,
we have GLSL, which is the OpenGL shading
language in Tiger.
And we also have a bunch of
performance optimizations.
And we've seen some really good wins with
games just running from Panther to Tiger.
So we're excited about that.
The other great thing about the
OpenGL story on Mac OS X is that
we've got some platform-specific
Mac OS X-only tools to work with OpenGL.
You can work with
OpenGL on other platforms,
but you don't get the
advantages of these tools.
Like OpenGL Profiler,
which you can wheel up to your
application and intercept all the
OpenGL calls and see what you're
doing and what's taking time.
Or the Driver Monitor,
where you can go in and
see how texture and VRAM.
is being allocated and see how long
you're waiting for the graphics card.
Or OpenGL Shader Builder,
where you can prototype
little fragment programs,
vertex programs.
So a really great set of tools.
And if you're not familiar with those,
you should definitely go to the
sessions and check those out.
So there's a couple of
sessions on OpenGL in 3D.
There's going to be a games track.
In fact, there's a whole games
track this year at WWDC.
And there's an OpenGL performance
session on Thursday as well.
So next we come to imaging.
The new technology in
Tiger here is Core Image,
which we talked about last year at WWDC,
and it's been shipping in Tiger.
It's a floating point image
processing framework based
on stream computing paradigm,
which I talked about last
year how that worked.
And it leverages both the GPU and
the CPU for implementation.
So whether you're on, say, a dual G5,
or whether you're on an
NVIDIA card or an ATI card,
we can program any of those computational
engines to do the work for you.
And the nice thing about Core Image is
the kernels are expressed in
a hardware-independent manner,
in a little mini OpenGL shading
language-like language for
doing image processing.
And this makes the whole
thing very approachable.
So you don't have to know how
to wrangle OpenGL and P buffers,
or program AlteVec, or whatever.
You can either string together predefined
kernels that we ship in the OS or
kernels that other people have given you.
Or you can write your own kernel,
and you just write the
inner bit of the loop,
and everything else happens around it.
Image units are a plug-in architecture
that goes along with core image,
which is similar analog to
core audio and audio units.
And it's extensible image processing
modules that you can do and install on
the system and be hosted by applications.
In fact, the new version of
Motion that just shipped,
Motion 2, will load image units.
And again, there's a licensing program,
whether you want to be a host app
or you want to write image units,
that you can go to license the logo.
Image.io is another really
interesting technology that we
put into Tiger-related imaging.
We took together all the best
implementations we had for JPEG,
TIFF, and some of the open-source
stuff that's out there,
put a universal API over that,
and support a wide variety
of formats with a single API.
And it's platform-optimized code,
so it's AlteVec-tuned
where it's important.
It supports metadata,
so all the Spotlight importers that
deal with still image formats come
through Image.io and get the metadata.
It has incremental loading, in fact,
Safari is on top of Image.io for
all of its image handling on Tiger.
And there's a bunch of new data formats
that we wanted to support as well.
Floating-point images,
both floating-point variants
of TIFF and OpenEXR,
which is a floating-point format,
and camera RAW formats.
If you have high-end
digital camera today,
there's a bunch of RAW formats
that Image.io will support as well.
There's a bunch of sessions this year
talking about Image.io as part of
the... example code that they're doing.
But what I wanted to
point at was this one,
Mac OS X Color Image Management Explained
,
because they actually go through
quite a number of interesting cases
with Image.io and color management,
so I wanted to point you at that.
Next up on the core image side,
we have a bunch of tools as well.
We've got Core Image Funhouse,
which we demoed last year at WWDC.
You saw Phil make the electric zebra.
The app's been cleaned up
and made ready for you.
In fact, the source code is in Tiger.
And you can explore the
built-in image units.
You can write your own,
and Funhaus will load them so you can
see your custom image unit in action.
Quartz Composer is also a really
good tool for exploring Core Image.
You can wire it up in real time.
You can be playing video.
I'll give you a demo of this in a second.
It includes a real-time little
Core Image kernel language pane
that you can type into and see
things change in real time.
So to point to the imaging sessions,
we've got Core Image tomorrow.
And then on Wednesday,
we've got Color Image Management and
Essential Ingredients
for Mac OS X Imaging,
which is about camera connectivity
and also some image I/O there as well.
Finally, video.
Core video, I'm not going to spend a
huge amount of time on it.
Tim talked how it relates to QuickTime.
It's an optimized architecture
for video on a texture,
includes all the data flow and
synchronization primitives to make
the GPU and the CPU have maximum
parallelism when presenting video.
There's a facility to synchronize
your display presentation of
video with display refresh,
and it forms the basis of the new
QuickTime 7 display architecture,
but you don't need to use QuickTime to
take advantage of core video.
If you're just reading, say,
raw YUV data from a disk
or something like that,
you can just use the buffering
services and draw it yourself.
So that's core video.
And of course,
what would Peter Graffagnino talk
be without a little GPU action?
So I thought I'd talk a little
bit about the GPU this year.
I mean, we've obviously put a lot of
technology on top of the GPU with
improvements in OpenGL and core
image and all of that thing.
But I wanted to kind of make a
slightly different point this year.
And that's what I call cutting
edge versus trailing edge.
The industry,
particularly in the area of graphics,
is moving really quickly.
And you've got to evolve or die.
I mean, if you don't,
you're going to die.
If you're still on Quick Draw,
let's face it, your application is going
to slowly become obsolete.
And people aren't going to use it because
you're not keeping up with the times.
But cutting edges are sharp.
And you've got to be careful when
you're running with sharp objects.
So there's some examples.
Last year,
we talked about Quartz 2D Extreme.
Quartz 2D Extreme, the final version,
is not in Tiger.
We learned a bunch of stuff
about the Quartz 2D API.
First off, we learned many applications
are not rendering bound.
And when they are rendering bound and
they're using the Quartz 2D API well,
we actually saw major performance
gains with Quartz 2D on top of OpenGL.
But for people who weren't
using the API well,
we actually saw some deficit
when they would run accelerated.
And so in the final analysis,
with the extra resources required,
it just wasn't worth doing
Quartz 2D Extreme until we
get everyone using the 2D API,
hang on to their image refs
so textures aren't uploaded.
So definitely go to that
2D optimization session.
And learn a bunch of stuff about
how to use Quartz 2D efficiently.
The other thing to be careful of
when dealing with GPU programming
is subtle differences between GPU.
For example, you saw Ted talk about
division by zero on CPUs.
Well, the same is true on GPUs, actually.
If you divide by zero on an ATI card,
you get a different answer than if
you divide by zero on an NVIDIA card.
And you just have to deal with these
things in order to make progress.
But my big message is, you know,
it's much better to be dealing with
these little nicks and bruises than
being on the cutting edge than it is,
you know, taking the conservative route.
Because if your competitor is
out there on the cutting edge,
you know, he's going to blaze the
trail in front of you,
and you want to be the
one out there in the lead.
So that's it for all of the
core technology that we have
in the operating system,
all industrial strength
across the spectrum here.
I have one more technology
I want to talk about,
which doesn't really fit
into any of those categories,
because it's kind of an integration
technology across the whole
suite of things in Mac OS X.
It's called Quartz Composer.
Quartz Composer is a framework
for real-time motion graphics,
animations, and visualizations.
The composition files that it
creates just can play back in
Tiger with a very simple runtime API.
They can actually play back
in QuickTime under Tiger.
With the developer tools,
there's a graphical editor that
you can edit these compositions,
and there's a really
simple-to-use API for including
them in your applications.
Some people make the analogy that
it's kind of like Interface Builder,
but for a little parameterized
motion graphics things.
So rather than try and
explain it some more,
let me go to the demo machine
and show you a few things.
Probably the most visible thing you
may have seen with Quartz Composer
is the screensaver in Mac OS X Tiger.
Let me bring it up here,
which is the RSS Visualizer.
So this is actually a
parameterized screensaver.
This is not rendered-- it's not
a QuickTime movie or anything.
It's actually reading the RSS feed,
putting things on textures.
There's a big sphere of cloudy
stuff that's rotating around.
And all that's just
dynamically calculated.
And in fact, to prove that to you,
what I can do is,
if I option click on the Options tab,
it actually brings up the composition.
And so if you want to go mess
with this on your system,
you can actually look at the hidden
parameters for the screensaver
and figure out what's going on.
Let's see,
another thing I wanted to show while
I'm here is some of the core image
integration with Quartz Composer.
So let me open up this composition here.
And you can see the data flow down here.
What's going on is I'm taking a movie,
and right now I'm just playing
it on a billboard texture.
This came from a guy on the internet
who post-- after Tiger shipped,
he went crazy and he did a
bunch of video processing stuff,
which I thought was pretty cool.
Sam Cass.
So I'm going to disconnect the
image from the text and put
it through this mixer here.
So I'm going to mix the original with
the video as it's processed through this
set of filters and put it back on there.
And what he's done is he's added
this sort of highlight glow effect,
which I think is pretty wild.
And you can actually go into
the inspector here and look
at some of the custom kernels.
This is actually the code
that he wrote to process it.
Some of these are built in.
Some of these are custom one.
And I can actually just go here.
It's evaluating this in real time.
I can say, OK, let's take the red and
multiply it 2.0 times R.
So there it is with a little extra red.
I could do, say, five times the red,
or six times the red,
or 10 times the red.
But if you're coming
up with an algorithm,
you can just have stuff playing
and just sit there typing with it.
So it's a great environment for
just kind of taming the GPU.
So let me quit that.
And another thing we noticed,
there's another guy who's
been messing around with
Quartz Composer over in Japan,
and he's done some amazing stuff.
Let me double click on that.
These were up on his blog,
and so we decided, well,
let's just load them all,
and let's just go into expose
and show you some of the
really cool things he's done.
One one in particular I like is this one.
I mean, it's getting decent frame rate.
Of course, there's like eight other
compositions going,
but that's kind of pretty.
I mean, you should check out his stuff.
Some of it's a little arty and probably
wouldn't take a while to absorb,
but it's a really great
site if you caught that URL,
if you didn't see me,
and I will point you at it.
Let's see, so that's it for the
Quartz Composer demo.
If I can go back to slides.
So now we do have one more demo for you.
So this is juggling the most
technology at once we could think of.
And so what we're going to do
is try to demonstrate all of the
technologies working together in Tiger,
both audio and visual.
And so the concept here is we're
going to use Quartz Composer with
parameterized compositions to
augment a live DJ performance.
And so these visuals are not rendered.
We do use a QuickTime movie
in there of some dancers,
but it's all real-time animation
that's responding to the performance.
And I think this is going to enable
some new possibilities and sort of
real-time creation on the platform.
So with that,
let me invite up Ean Golden.
Ean is a local DJ and producer,
and he's going to show us
what he's been able to do.
Hey, Ean.
Hey, Peter.
Thank you.
Hey guys, I'm really excited to be here,
and most excited about what
you're going to create over the
next year for me to play with.
Because I am the end user,
you guys are the creators,
and I'm really,
really stoked about all the
technology that he just talked about,
and what you can do with it,
and then what I can do with it live.
I've been a professional
DJ for eight years,
and about two years ago
I made a major change.
I started DJing completely digitally.
I got rid of the records,
I got rid of the turntables,
and I started using my PowerBook,
a sound card, my headphones,
and a program called Traktor
from Native Instruments,
which I want to show
you a little bit about.
So, Traktor is basically
emulating your standard decks,
if you will.
On one side you've got one
piece of music playing.
And on the other side,
you've got a second
piece of music playing.
And it all comes together in
the center in an internal mixer.
Traktor's really cool.
It's got some extra features.
It's got really interesting looping
functions and filters and all
kinds of great stuff that I can
manipulate the songs live with.
And the one major obstacle that Traktor,
even though it created all
this opportunity for creative
potential-- I could take songs,
I could remix them on the fly,
I could do whatever I wanted--
the major obstacle it came up
against was something I very
fondly refer to as the geek effect,
which is I was using a laptop.
And when you stick a performer
on a stage with a laptop,
oftentimes people don't feel
like you're actually performing.
They feel like you're up there checking
your email or surfing the internet.
And for all they know,
you could be playing a podcast off
of iTunes and not be doing anything.
So the major battle was, OK,
now how do I show people this dynamic,
incredible, performance that we're able
to do with this technology?
And the answer was by
integrating visuals,
by, through digital means,
showing on the screen what
I was doing on the computer.
And I was able to do this,
but it was through very tedious means.
Basically, we had a second laptop
running a great program,
a standard VJ program called VDMX.
And we used standard video clips.
And we applied different kinds of
effects to the video to reflect
in real time what I was doing.
But I came up against
two really big obstacles.
The first was processor power.
Anybody who works with video knows
the more effects you apply to video,
as they start adding up,
your processor hits the floor.
It just goes through the floor.
You can't do all that much.
The other problem was creative.
I found a creative ceiling.
I had all these ideas I wanted to do.
When I turn a filter,
I want the whole thing to spin around.
And I want the screen to explode.
And there's only so much you can
do with video and effects before,
again, the processor hits the floor.
After doing a couple of
shows with this technology,
I was introduced to Quartz Composer.
And it became very apparent right
off the bat this was the answer
that I had been looking for.
Quartz Composer solved
both of these problems,
number one,
because it's not leveraging only the CPU,
but the GPU.
And not only is it freeing
up the CPU by using the GPU,
but now I was able to run
it all on the same machine.
I could run Tractor on the GPU.
I could run Quartz Composer on the CPU.
Quartz on the GPU.
And have both of these programs running
the same environment dynamically.
And the second major thing,
the thing that really excited me,
was Quartz Composer was
not affecting video.
It was creating content on the fly.
It was essentially generating
the same kind of material that
I was generating in the stage,
which gave me unlimited creative
potential for what I wanted to do.
I mean, really,
the sky is the limit on that.
I could do anything, basically.
However, it was really just a limitation
of what I wanted to do.
So I started working with the
team at Apple to find an effective
integration of these two technologies.
And what we did for this particular
demo is we've connected one piece
of music in Tractor-- you see,
it's on the left side-- to one aspect,
or one layer, of this Quartz composition.
Let's see.
I'll show that to you here real quick.
So we've got a piece of video,
or one aspect of the court's composition,
connected to one piece
of audio on one side,
and we've got another aspect of the
court's composition connected to a
second piece of audio on the second side.
And then we've also connected
all the different looping and
filters and effects to different
parameters of these compositions.
So as I start to mix these two
pieces of audio together live,
and as that mix evolves,
the video mix will also
evolve in real time,
sort of reflecting what I'm
doing and creating a compelling
example of the performance
that's going on on the screen.
So without much further ado,
I'm going to do a short little
demonstration of what that might
look like in the real world.
You know what would be good?
If I stuck Quark's composer
up on the screen first.
Explain that a little bit for you,
what was going on.
Maybe it was apparent, maybe it wasn't,
but I'll do it pretty quick.
So Ean had a device called
Trigger Finger from M-Audio,
which is just a pad that sends a
bunch of MIDI signals into Traktor
DJ Studio through Core MIDI and
then playing out the audio.
So that's just his basic setup,
that's what he performs with.
And so what we did is we
added Quartz Composer,
we took the MIDI signals out of Traktor
and out of the controller itself,
and we built some compositions
which used video and audio.
And so what we did is we
added Quartz Composer,
we took the MIDI signals out of Traktor
and out of the controller itself,
and we built some compositions
which used video and audio.
So finally,
I'm going to bring Tim back up on stage,
and he's going to wrap us up.
Thanks a lot, everybody.
Thanks.
Okay, so we've given you a quick
tour of some of the coolest
technologies in Mac OS X Tiger.
We think there's a lot of
exciting stuff going on here,
and we're really looking forward to
talking with you this week and hearing
about your experience with this.
Of course,
we've only been able to scratch the
surface of all of the new features that
our teams have built into the system.
There's literally hundreds of
new features in the system for
you to play around with and
utilize in your applications.
Now, we've got lots and lots of
engineers here all week long,
and I hope you'll have a
chance to talk with them.
I hope you'll not be shy,
come up and talk with me or
Peter about what you're up to.
We really would love to hear this.
We've got two feedback forums
on the afternoon of Friday.
Come and tell us if you haven't had a
chance to talk to us during the week.
Come and talk to us at the end of the
week and tell us what you're thinking.
You know, there's one topic I haven't
talked about today,
and I thought I probably should
mention something about it.
And this was this little
detail of transitions.
If things work the way
I want them to work,
you really aren't going to have to worry
about these kinds of issues in terms
of the graphics and media technologies.
The way that I've spelled out our goals
for Mac OS X in the area of graphics and
media is that it's our job to provide you
the right kinds of APIs so that we can
insulate you from these kinds of changes.
We've done a lot of the work already.
And by the time we get
together next year,
we'll have done the rest of the work.
And, you know, my expectation is it's
going to go really well,
and we're very excited about it.
If you write to the APIs,
you'll derive all the
benefits of our hard work,
and we hope you'll take us up on that.
Anyway,
that's graphics and media in Tiger.
Thank you very much for coming.
Have a great week.